(mystical music)
Of all the religions of the world, one of the
most mystical is that of Sufism.
It's roots are Islamic, and the practice
is one of the heart.
Shaikh Kabir Helminski was the first Westerner recognized
as a shake or elder in the the Mevlevi order of Sufism
which dates back to the 13th century
and is based on the works of the great poet
and philosopher, Rumi.
In the West we know a little of this tradition
other than the beautiful poems of Rumi
which have been excerpted to appear
on greeting cards.
Here Shaikh Helminski explains that among other things,
Sufism has been at the heart of Islam,
but has been marginalized somewhat by extremism.
I would like it if you could begin to tell me about
the essence of this Sufi way.
Let's start with Rumi since he has been the major
voice of Sufism in the West recently,
and very popular, very beloved.
People intuitively sense that there's something here
of beauty and value, but Rumi was not unique
or even innovative in the Sufi tradition.
He's completely exemplary.
He's an organic outgrowth
of a tradition that goes back
to the prophet Mohammad.
Peace and blessings upon him
and the revelation of the Quarn.
Some people have suggested that Sufism
predates Islam.
If they mean mysticism predated it,
Islam, of course,
but the qualities that we associate with Sufism
really were exemplified beginning with
the prophet and the
revelation that came through him,
and particularly the language, the metaphysics,
the vocabulary, the context
was all
established about 14 centuries ago,
and Rumi and other great Sufis
are organic outgrowths of that.
They're almost like fractals of that original
truth or revelation.
Rumi is exemplary of his spirituality that
is very much grounded in life
integrated with our humanness, and I think that's
one of the attractions.
People innately sense that the spirituality that Rumi
offers is
the fulfillment of our humanness,
not something that marginalizes
our humanness or disregards it, but
for Rumi and for all sufis and also for
the prophet Mohammad,
becoming fully human in cooperation with the divine
while living an integrated
useful, practical life.
These are the conditions in which
our
greatest spirituality can be reached.
Without sacrificing the
highest dimensions of human
spiritual attainment.
In other words, without sacrificing
the experience of oneness
and the trancendent
awesome experience of the divine,
but integrate it with
a humble human life.
And this is interesting when you're talking
about this integration, because we are here at the science
and non-duality conference in which you've
been invited to speak, and you've been invited
throughout your career into some other places
normally reserved for more traditional thinking.
I understand, correct me
if this is not accurate that you were invited in
as one of the first or the first representative to speak
on the Sufi way to Harvard and to the religious studies
department.
You've been breaking ground all along the way,
but it struck me as interesting
at this event in particular, because I'm hearing
a lot of really heavy stuff about everything short of
scraping brain cells onto a slide and trying
to dissect and figure out what consciousness is.
It's very science oriented, and then there's you,
and there are a few others that would be considered
to be more connected into the notion of
the mystical realms.
Why are you here
and what is the science and non-duality aspect of Sufism?
Good.
I would like to sort of
start with the subject of the human heart.
The human heart understood
as our foremost instrument
for knowing, and
what the heart can know.
Science so far
is receiving information through
the senses, and when I say
through the senses I mean through
the investigation of the material world
which has led science into dimensions
of knowledge that have to do
with energy and ultimately,
the relationship of human intention or
mind to energy
and material, and this is
a very exciting area, but I
would maintain that it's still.
Science is still at a very
crude stage of understanding
the whole picture of
existence and the human being's
place in existence, and what's so far missing
from science which I would like to bring
attention to is that
through this very extraordinary instrument
called the heart, human experience
is opened up to a qualitative universe.
What about a science of qualities?
Are we even close to that yet?
What I mean by qualities are things like
sensing meaning and significance,
sensing relationship,
sensing
the tenderness of the universe,
the way in which the universe
is intelligent and nurturing
and the way every human being
who is not, shall we say, pathologically
handicapped, disabled,
every healthy human being
finds joy in relationship,
and in relationship discovers
qualities that are the most valued, enduring qualities
that we know in our experience.
It's the heart that gives us that capacity.
The human being who experiences
himself or herself as a
finite entity with a limited life span
I seem to be talking in duality,
but bear with me.
We experience ourselves as finite encountering the infinite.
In that experience we are open to things like
humbleness, awe,
love, appreciation of beauty,
beauty not just on a physical level,
but we even have a sense of spiritual beauty as
a possibility, as a yearning for something
extraordinarily pure and beautiful.
This is innate in our souls,
in our heart, in our experience.
If you don't believe in soul and heart,
let's just say in our experience, and
in speaking about spirituality, this is a little footnote.
I'm speaking not from some doctrine primarily,
but from experience and my own presence
at the laboratory of experience.
As I look to my own experience I see there
are all these extraordinary possibilities
as an individual, and I'm an individual.
How does that relate to this non-dual reality?
It's a beautiful paradox that the
enigma of individuality is
resolved in the experience
of relationships with a divine source.
The sufi put it simply knows
that our consciousness, our love,
our will, our capacity for forgiveness,
every function
and quality of our being
is given to us
graced to us by an infinite source of life,
and at a certain stage, as you make that journey
of consciousness into yourself.
As you step back behind your desires,
emotional reactions, passing thoughts,
and come to that realm of pure subjectivity
you experience that, our very presence
our consciousness is sourced
in that let's call it non-dual reality, which we
call Allah.
Fortunately, the Quran is pretty fastidious
in not creating any dogma
about a law, about God.
God is indescribable, cannot be conceived,
therefore, cannot be argued about.
The very, very
refined and subtle notion of the divinity
that exists in Islam, and
sufis have found the Quran to be a beautiful
vehicle for expressing and understanding
this non-dual reality, but what it comes down to
very simply is that
there is no power, nor agency but with God,
and the human being is as an individual is
the fruition of
the divine in this realm of existence,
and that the purpose of our lives
is to come to more fully know
the awesome beauty and generosity
and intelligence of the divine.
Simultaneously we have individuality
and we have that individuality sourced in the ground
of being, and yet
we have a purpose here in life
which is to know,
to know and love God,
and we do that through ourselves,
through our own experience,
through relationship,
and through the capacity of the heart.
It has an extraordinary capacity to know,
sense qualitatively, not just
quantitatively or mathematically the
universe of qualities.
Sorry for rather long answer, but
No, long answers are good.
It's interesting, because even
in the world of science with all of our
engineering of new technologies to be able
to detect intelligence in life of all kinds,
one of the things that's emerging from that
is that the heart itself appears to have
understanding prior to the brain.
It's our original sensing device
that is connected to, we can say now
perhaps a unified field, the all.
The validation for beginning to allow the heart
to speak is even there within the scientific realms
which is interesting, because it seems as though
people have needed permission somehow
since we entered this materialistic
paradigm a couple hundred years ago.
People have needed permission since then to listen
to the heart.
Now science says it's okay, you can listen to the heart.
It actually gets it before the brain.
We'll just put that out there as a little
modern context to what you're saying.
And of course by the heart, I mean
more than the physical heart.
I don't mean to limit it to the core.
I don't mean reify what I'm talking about
to mean the physical heart,
and yet the physical heart itself
is extraordinary.
It's intuitive, it's connected.
It's intuitive and it has a huge,
it's a huge electromagnetic phenomena
in our own being.
You're speaking of heart with
the capital H, and I do understand that.
I'm just trying to take it into
an undeniable realm of even the small H
heart we can't deny this any longer.
And that's helpful.
And now,
are the sufis sometimes thought of almost as a
an extreme, an extremist sect within
the Islamic faith, because of the
the deep commitment
to living this more gnostic
or mystical kind of life?
Is there, you understand what I'm saying.
Yes.
No, sufis have been at the heart
of traditional Islam during most of it's history,
and have had an honored place
within Islam.
Although in recent times for various reasons,
Sufism has been more marginalized in Islamic cultures
because of two factors.
One is because of modernism with it's emphasis
on science and materialism
which affected even Islamic thinking,
and also extremism and fundamentalism
which is in some ways
a new phenomena, a relatively new phenomena in Islam,
and this has caused the marginalization
of Sufism in the most modern times,
but traditionally Islam has been a civilization
which mysticism has come very close to the surface
you might say.
And it's partly because there are many features
many aspects of Islam that are
exclusively mystical.
For instance, people talk about,
imagine that the Quran could be read
in a literalistic way, the way some people
read the Bible.
If you're going to take the Quran literally,
how are you going to deal with
a verse like this,
to God belongs the East and the West,
and wheresoever you look is the face of God.
How could you understand that literally?
You could be a raving mystic
to accept that proposition, or another example,
Muslims pray five times a day.
They do a series of standing, bowing,
and prostrating.
What are they prostrating to?
A religious institution, a human being?
No, they're standing before the infinite,
and they're putting all their worldly concerns
and preoccupations behind them,
and they're saying the divinity
is greater than everything,
and they hopefully are remembering the
advice of the prophet Mohammad who said
the ritual prayer is only valid
with presence.
True, if you're going through it by wrote,
it has no meaning.
The ritual prayer itself even at the level
of enteric Islam becomes an exercise
in mindfulness.
In many ways, Sufism
is not exactly the same as the outer
religion of Islam, but it has been a path,
what we call a perica,
and it's explicitly recognized as
a path for those
who seek more than
nominal belonging to a religion,
to those kinds of souls
who have a contemplative and
transformational calling,
and Sufi orders particularly since
the 12th century have been pervasive
in the Islamic world.
They're just a part of life, and
And this is really non-exclusive in nature
and global.
It's global.
It's non-exclusive, and
it's an accepted part
of common consciousness
that some people will be called to this
transformational contemplative way of life
while still having families, holding down a job,
doing the practical things of life.
This has been a beautiful side, a very enriching side
of Islamic civilization.
Recently, the king of Morocco called a thousand sufi shakes.
This was a few months ago, and I was there.
He wanted to send the message to the world
that sufis should be allowed to do their work,
that they work for the betterment of human souls
which ultimately benefits cultures,
and they should not be instrumentalized politically
to serve any political purpose, but should be
protected and allowed to do the work
that traditionally they do.
I had the great pleasure of being together
with about 1,000 sufi shakes and scholars.
A third of them were from black Africa.
A third of them were from the Arab world,
and a third of them were from everywhere else
including California and France,
and even China.
It was a great affirmation that sufis
have a place, and that
their work is needed
in todays world, and can
contribute to stability
of societies at a time when
there are a lot of destabilizing factors,
particularly extremism.
Of all kinds.
Yeah, and one of my friends, Cideamid Coastis
who is the assistant minister for religious affairs
in Morocco now has been given a TV program
in Morocco where he talks about
I'd say sufi character, and
extremists who have never for some reason,
they are mostly ignorant people
are being exposed to the beauties of
the teachings on character, and the sweetness
of the sufi heart, and
it's a very beneficial thing
for that society at this time.
And it seems that it's important for us
to understand something here, and you already
touched on this when you were talking about
the prayer five times a day.
This doesn't have to do with minimizing oneself
as a human being before
a deity.
This really is about remembering that aspect
within the self, and there is a line
by Rumi that I just love, and it had to do
with knock and the door will be open unto you,
and he was saying, I knocked and the door was open,
and then I realized I was knocking from the inside,
meaning we already are that, but we have forgotten
that we already are that, and this is
an awakening and remembering as much as anything.
Is it not?
That's a good point.
If we look at the prayer,
and you see that people are standing in rows
and they're bowing, and they prostrating.
When they stand, this is a meditative posture
of accepting our human responsibility
as caretakers and as representatives
of the divine in this world.
The bowing reminds us that we're
also servants of creation and each other.
The prostration is a prostration not to any human authority
or human formulation.
The prostration is toward the real,
towards the highest truth itself
and acknowledging that where we
assume the responsibility and authority
in the world, we openly
are surrendered to
the beauty, the grace,
and the power of the divine
without which we would be nothing.
All of our faculties are gifts of the divine.
We'd have no knowing beauty.
Right, right, so we
we are in awe of the beauty of the divine
more than anything else,
and Sufism is a process it's understood as a process of
purifying the heart so that
we perceive, we reach a level of spiritual perception
relatively free of the distortions of egoism, but
the teachings on ego in sufism I think are very practical,
because we don't talk about
destroying the self, and we don't talk about being without
a self, but we do talk about seven levels of the self,
and at the lowest level, the self is in a prison
of compulsions and
Addictions and what not.
And we move through various levels of subtlization
second level is a stage of
feeling some conscience, awakening of conscience.
The third stage is reaching,
becoming a functioning healthy ego,
a positive human being.
What would be considered salvation in religious terms.
The fourth level of the self in Sufism
is the beginning of awakening into consciousness,
mindfulness, presence.
This is where most of the eserteric teachings begin.
It can be a long phase of our practice
to introduce presence and awareness
into every breath, every action, every relationship.
The fifth level is
experiencing unity or intimacy with the divine,
where we have a lived experience
of how everything we are is sourced in the divine.
It's only the fifth stage.
The sixth stage, and I'm going through this as concisely
as I can.
The point being that we always have some
experience of I ness at all these stages.
The sixth stage is when you turn back
from that unity and return to this world
with all of it's conflicts, joys and disappointments,
but with that illumination,
with that awareness that
the divine is closer to us than our
jugular vein.
The sixth stage is almost like
crucifixion.
It's when you experience all the suffering
of life, but without losing your awareness of being
sourced in the divine.
The seventh stage is
being an ordinary human being,
invisible, anonymous, but with
purity of heart,
grounded in this life, but integrating
all levels of consciousness
in that life, but always
the sense of I is transformed.
In the early stages, you were like ice.
You're like a block of ice.
At another stage you melt into water,
the I melts into water.
At another stage it becomes it's steamy, vaporous,
and finally at the highest stage,
it's almost as if one's sense of I
while being locatable
as a person, also has at least an aspect
which is more like humidity.
You sense that your identity
extends in some sense through the universe,
and is in every other me and in every other self,
but still there's always a sense
an ever subtler, more comprehensive sense of self,
so that the self is like the drop.
It doesn't dissolve in the ocean.
The drop realizes it contains the ocean,
and the drop can choose.
The drop that has reached a certain level
of spiritual maturity can be at will
the drop or the ocean depending on
what the need is at that moment.
And that's why you're at the science in
non-duality conference.
Yes.
As I was listening to you go through the seven
phases, it seems to me
that Rumi appeared to be writing a lot
of his most well known works from
almost that fifth stage.
He dissolves that we've heard the ecstatic utterances
were yes, many of them were at that stage,
but he also has his master work is called The Masnavi
and it's six volumes of rhymed couplets
that include stories that are interwoven almost like
soap operas.
They go on sometimes for 50 pages
with lots of interruptions, and there are sublime prayers.
There are vulgar jokes, but all of it
is a teaching about this oneness,
in every story, every page
reminds us of this oneness.
He has a sober teaching and a systematic teaching,
and a great spiritual psychology that's very practical
as well.
It seems the West has more or less
globbed onto the ecstatic parts that we can interpret
the way we wish.
I think that's probably why it's become so
embraced, but you know that's a wonderful
starting place.
It's a beginning.
It's a wonderful beginning.
And that ecstasy and that bliss,
we have a right to that.
Yes, we do.
We need it, more than that,
we need it.
We do need that.
I have a couple of practical questions.
The title of Shake.
How is this conferred upon a person, such
as yourself, what's your story?
Because you come out of the Rumi line
as I understand it.
You can't go to Shake school and get a degree.
It's conferred upon someone
by someone in the lineage who has the authority
and respect to confer it on another,
and it usually means I would say two things.
One is that it suggests a certain level
of spiritual realization and maturity, on the one hand.
One has been through the process,
the sufi process,
but at the same time it also
represents a certain capacity to
communicate the teaching,
to take some responsibility for
the education of other souls,
and to be in some sense also a manager
of this process.
It's a relatively rare
title in our tradition, and
it's all those things.
It's a whole package of responsibilities.
Thank you for that.
I'm also curious about the whole notion
of whirling dervishes.
This is part of the vernacular western life too,
and I've participated in a couple of shikars through
the years on Rumi's birthday.
In Sedona there were a couple of people
who are just exquisite at reciting the poetry
who would put these events on,
and I enjoyed them and did some
of the whirling myself.
Without, of course, understanding the nature of it
only the experience of it.
What is the nature, the origins
of whirling and the purpose of whirling?
Whirling exists in a number of forms.
It predates Rumi, but it took a new form with Rumi
and with his teacher Shams of Tabriz.
Shams encouraged this whirling,
and during the time when Rumi
was alive the occasions on which they
came together with music and poetry
and joy and worship and whirling,
sometimes it would go on for days and days.
It was a very spontaneous, but deeply spiritual
activity.
Shortly thereafter, and really
through the knowledge conferred by Shems
to Rumi's son, Deled.
It became more ceremonial, and in the ceremony is
like a living cosmology and alchemy, and
it has so many features, but let's start
with the whirling itself.
In order to whirl as we whirl and Medlavi's tradition
one has to first of all
be able to turn around a still axis
which is the left leg.
Whirling in our tradition
requires the development
of a certain capacity for attention
so that a person can be turning on their left
leg as the axis point.
The right leg and foot takes steps
which are 360 degrees.
Does it have to be counterclockwise?
Is it always counterclockwise?
It's always counterclockwise,
or it's almost always counterclockwise,
and maybe that has something to do with
the neutralizing of time.
Yes, exactly.
I understand from a physics point of view
we're looking at spiral dynamics really.
I didn't know what physics would say about this,
but our understanding is that to
turn counterclockwise
is to bring energies into this world
as an act of service.
It's a type of charging.
We're not doing this to take ourselves
out of the world or specifically to reach
some ecstasy through the send.
There really is an act of service,
and in this act of service, you're turning
with a group of people, so there's a choreography
that one has to be aware of.
There's also a heart relationship to the shape
who is just standing there
as the
transmission point for the lineage
holding a certain state of being
which traces back to all generations
of shapes and back to Rumi, and back to the prophet
Mohammad, so there's a lineage.
A shake whole set lineage.
The dervishes who were whirling are
doing their best to be in hard contact
with that lineage.
They have one hand up receiving,
another hand down
transmitting through the heart,
and it's a meditation in motion.
It is coming to our inmost center
where we're closest to God and experiencing
that intimacy, and
it's also a joining in community.
It's worship above all.
It's reverencing the divine.
It's an expression of
beauty through a
highly developed classical music,
which gave birth to a great classical music tradition.
It is also
poetry is sung along with the music,
and ultimately a person moves through stages
of consciousness,
deeper and deeper into that fifth stage of ecstatic union
which is the third Salam, the third phase of movement,
but then we come back into the fourth
salam or phase which becomes very
dignified, sober whirling
where the person who is lost in a sense
lost their individuality briefly
during the third stage, comes back
and is given their individuality back,
in a sense in a new form, a new you,
a new self is resurrected.
There's that whole process, and then the ceremony ends.
It ends at a point, all the dervishes
will be turning.
The music will be reduced to one simple instrument
improvising, and you hear the swishing of the robes
and the feet and the silence and beautiful
subtle improvisation, and then suddenly
as if out of no where you hear
the recitation of the Quran,
and particularly this verse
to God belongs the East and the West
and wheresoever you turn is the face of God
and at that moment all the dervishes
stop.
They put their hands over their shoulders.
They become the number one,
the letter olif
to testify to the oneness of God,
and they kneeled down on sheepskins
and they are ready to listen with a pure heart
to the Quran recitation.
Everything leads up to that point.
It's a very beautiful celebration.
Even though, I understood very little
of what I was doing, as with most of the people
that were there.
We certainly could feel it by way
of that transmission.
it was absolutely lovely
deepening experience.
There is some objective phenomena
going on in the turning,
and it's electromagnetic, because we are turning
within the earth's electromagnetic field,
and we are an electromagnet ourselves.
It's a very pronounced feeling.
I found it very enlivening,
very soothing and ecstatic all at the same time,
and very mind expanding.
It was lovely.
Let me ask you this.
At this time,
we have various belief systems that are
calumniating in this sense of urgency
in the Christian tradition it's a sense of
an impending armageddon
in the, for lack of a better word,
I'll just say new age communities or metaphysical
communities.
It would be a focus on the coming date of 2012
and the years surrounding that.
Is there anything with the Islamic or
Sufi tradition that is looking at these times
as well as anything particularly unique?
I'll speak from my own experience and perception
of this, because yes, there are end times,
statements, and propositions in Islam,
whether they're authentic or not
can be debated, but let me also say that Islam
and Sufism particularly always has a sense
of the apocalyptic, in a sense that the unveiling
that happened every moment as if the resurrection
itself is possible here and now.
We live in that reality.
That is our everyday reality.
At the same time, when we look at the sweep
of history, and we look at what
is undeniable, the changes humanity has gone through
in the last
100,000 years when human speech developed,
and the last 26,000 years, which by the way,
I don't know if anyones noticed or commented,
but 26,000 years ago is when the first
portraits of human beings appeared.
I have not heard that.
I have heard of various kayvarts from 40,000
years ago, but not specifically toward
the portrait.
But they're not faces.
They're not portraits.
26,000 years ago human beings
reached a certain level
of self-awareness, and we ourselves
were introduced into a lineage that's
actually 26,000 years old.
It has an oral tradition 26,000 years old,
and my teacher, I asked him, why 26,000 years?
He looked at me like I was foolish
and said, well we keep track,
but later I realized that something happened then
before I knew about the perception of the equinox
I discovered on the cover
of National Geographic a picture
of the oldest known human face.
It was 26,000 years.
Very interesting.
Anyway, I'm laying out scales of time 26,000 years
sometimes been going on.
5,000 years ago recorded history.
A few hundred years ago to 50, 300 years ago
industrialization, the shrinking of the world
with steamships.
In more recent times the technology
and particularly now the internet and the whole
technosphere that we're involved with.
Life has been incredibly intense
in the last 11 years or so.
For instance, a huge difference it seems,
and even more so it seems in recent years.
There's an intensification going on.
It seems undeniable what it will lead to, I don't know,
but I do experience the intensification.
I have a sense that we're coming
to a new sense of time
just as in the Renaissance people
developed a capacity for perspective in the
three dimensional space we live in
that we are opening up
to something mystics have known and experienced,
but a kind of perspective within time
and a capacity to have a different relationship to time,
and I also suspect that there is some shrinking
between human intention and mind
and manifestation.
Yes, it would seem so.
That synchronicities are,
synchronicity dials are being turned up, and
therefore, the significance
of this to me is that it places
at great responsibility on us
to be aware
and responsible for every thought and feeling,
and so the spiritual solution here,
or the spiritual need for these times
is to
learn to rest in the divine,
to trust the divine,
to be so rooted in the divine
that the intensification of time
and the
incredible bombardment with information
and the intensity
of life itself
can be met
from a still point within ourselves,
and in that still point is
to really find that still point
it's not purely a mental phenomena.
It's not something you just think about.
It has something to do with trust in the divine,
and surrender to the divine,
and when we have that trust and surrender
and we know that what we are is essentially
infinite, pure spirit and love,
then we can act from that
truth,
and we can
be examples of sanity
and balance and peace
at a time when there are many
reasons not to feel this way.
That couldn't be put any more elegantly.
Very true.
May the divine strengthen us
and guide us and
purify our intentions, and
may the divine also make us capable
of becoming a we
at a time
when there's much them and us,
or I and me.
Maybe know the truth of we as a race,
as individuals, as spiritual seekers,
as simply human beings.
On that note, thank you so much for spending
time with us today and for adding clarity to something
that has been so mysterious to most of us.
Thank you for inviting me
and for conducting this very beautiful interview.
To learn more about Sufism and Shaikh Helminski's work
you can go to sufism.com,
and if you haven't already explored the profound poetry
of Rumi, it's a magnificent glimpse into the connection
with the divine.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(mystical music)